
Smart Traffic Management 
System using Image Processing 
 
Jerome K, Manoj S Nagendra 
St. Joseph’s College of Engineering 
ivanjerome99@gmail.com; manojnagendra@gmail.com  
9840940416; 9566270844  
 
Abstract— The usage of vehicles is rapidly increasing due to recent technological and 
economic development, and at the same time, the lack of infrastructure against the demand is 
leading to an increasing number of accidents and fatality of life. The trivial issues in our life 
system motivated us to come up with an application to automate this process and save lives. 
With a review of literature and brainstorming, I proposed the project on a smart traffic 
management system using image processing. The objective of this project is to develop a (1) 
simulation to determine the traffic density, (2) detect a crash/accident, (3) detect ambulance 
using image processing and machine learning techniques.  
In the first phase, we determined traffic density to minimize the delay caused by traffic 
congestion and to provide the smooth flow of vehicles. The density of vehicles on each side can 
be identified by using datasets. If the density is low on a particular side, the period for that side 
is normal and if the density is high the period will automatically increase compared to normal 
density. In the second phase, we simulated a crash or accident detection and for the prototype 
consideration, we have used static accidental image and trained model. In the third phase, 
analysed ambulance detection using the dataset, for the prototype consideration for this, used 
static ambulance image and trained dataset. On detection of an ambulance, the traffic light is 
automatically changed to green. In each phase, the data updating and monitoring are provided. 
This scheme is fully automated and identifies the emergency vehicle and controls the traffic 
lights dynamically. Hence, the projects result in traffic management using image processing 
techniques. 
 
Keywords- Vehicle Density Calculation, Crash Alert, Ambulance Detection, 
Background Subtraction, Edge Detection, Template Matching 